---
title: "Directe belastingen, Internationale inlichtingenuitwisseling; Noorwegen"
identifier: "BWBR0037857"
country: "nl"
rank: "beleidsregel"
publication_date: "2016-04-06"
last_updated: "2014-01-01"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0037857"
soort: "beleidsregel"
stam_id: "13479943"
version_id: "23133062"
internal_id: "C33434661"
label_id: "13446914"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2016-04-06"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBR0037857/2016-04-06/0"
intitule_bron: "Stcrt.2016-20455"
intitule_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
intitule_signed: "2016-04-06"
intitule_published: "2016-04-22"
intitule_in_force: "2016-04-22"
intitule_status: "goed"
original_publication: "Stcrt.2016-20455"
original_signed_date: "2016-04-06"
original_published_date: "2016-04-22"
original_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
original_url_id: "stcrt-2016-20455"
entry_into_force_date: "2016-04-06"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBR0037857&z=2016-04-06&g=2016-04-06"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBR0037857&g=2016-04-06"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
signed_date: "2016-04-06"
entry_into_force: "2016-04-06"
---
# Directe belastingen, Internationale inlichtingenuitwisseling; Noorwegen

De staatssecretaris van Financiën maakt het volgende bekend.

**Dit besluit bevat een bekendmaking van het in april 2016 tussen de bevoegde autoriteiten van Nederland en Noorwegen gesloten Memorandum van Overeenstemming inzake automatische uitwisseling van fiscale inlichtingen. De overeenkomst heeft voornamelijk betrekking op automatische uitwisseling van inlichtingen (zonder voorafgaand verzoek) over onroerende zaken, dividend, royalty's, inkomsten uit zelfstandige arbeid, inkomsten uit niet-zelfstandige arbeid, directeursbeloningen, inkomsten van artiesten en sportbeoefenaars, pensioenen, lijfrenten en sociale zekerheidsuitkeringen, betalingen aan studenten voor studie en opleiding, overige inkomsten en wijzigingen in fiscaal inwonerschap. Verder zijn bepalingen opgenomen over de aanwezigheid van belastingambtenaren op elkaars grondgebied.**

**Het Memorandum is op 6 april 2016 in werking getreden en is voor het eerst van toepassing op informatie over het jaar 2014.**

### Memorandum of Understanding

Memorandum of Understanding between the Norwegian Directorate of Taxes and the Directorate General of the Tax and Customs Administration of the Netherlands regarding the exchange of information in tax matters.

The Norwegian Directorate of Taxes and the Directorate General of the Tax and Customs Administration of the Netherlands, hereinafter: the “Participants”, considering the desire to intensify mutual cooperation in tax matters, have agreed the following.

Pursuant to the provisions with regard to the exchange of information of the Convention on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters, closed in Strasbourg on 25 January 1988, as amended in 2010, and article 27 of the Convention between the Kingdom of Norway and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, signed in Oslo on 12 January 1990, as amended in 2013, the competent authorities referred to under 2 of this Memorandum will exchange information automatically.

The competent authorities can agree by exchange of letters to exchange categories of information, other than the above-mentioned categories, automatically or intensified spontaneously for a certain period.

This Memorandum may be referred to as “Memorandum of Understanding between Norway and the Netherlands on the exchange of information in tax matters.”

This Memorandum will be evaluated five years after the date of commencement. However, questions with regard to this Memorandum can be taken up at any time at the request of one of the competent authorities.
