---
title: "Directe belastingen, Internationale inlichtingenuitwisseling; IJsland"
identifier: "BWBR0039293"
country: "nl"
rank: "beleidsregel"
publication_date: "2017-02-13"
last_updated: "2017-02-13"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0039293"
soort: "beleidsregel"
stam_id: "13933353"
version_id: "23957772"
internal_id: "C34446611"
label_id: "13897224"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2017-02-13"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBR0039293/2017-02-13/0"
intitule_bron: "Stcrt.2017-12468"
intitule_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
intitule_signed: "2017-02-13"
intitule_published: "2017-03-08"
intitule_in_force: "2017-03-08"
intitule_status: "goed"
original_publication: "Stcrt.2017-12468"
original_signed_date: "2017-02-13"
original_published_date: "2017-03-08"
original_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
original_url_id: "stcrt-2017-12468"
entry_into_force_date: "2017-02-13"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBR0039293&z=2017-02-13&g=2017-02-13"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBR0039293&g=2017-02-13"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
signed_date: "2017-02-13"
entry_into_force: "2017-02-13"
---
# Directe belastingen, Internationale inlichtingenuitwisseling; IJsland

**De staatssecretaris van Financiën maakt het volgende bekend.**

**Dit besluit bevat een bekendmaking van het in februari 2017 tussen het Ministerie van Financiën en Economische Zaken van IJsland en het Ministerie van Financiën van Nederland gesloten Memorandum van Overeenstemming inzake inlichtingenuitwisseling in belastingaangelegenheden. Het Memorandum geeft o.a. categorieën weer voor de automatische uitwisseling van fiscale inlichtingen en voor zover deze beschikbaar zijn, zoals informatie over onroerende zaken, bedrijfswinsten, dividend, rente, inkomsten uit zelfstandige arbeid, salarissen, lonen en andere soortgelijke beloningen, directeursbeloningen, inkomsten verkregen door artiesten en sportbeoefenaars, pensioenen, lijfrenten, sociale zekerheidsuitkeringen en andere soortgelijke betalingen, betalingen aan studenten voor opleidingen en overige inkomsten. Het Memorandum is op 13 februari 2017 in werking getreden en de eerste uitwisseling heeft betrekking op het jaar 2016.**

De datum van inwerkingtreding ligt voor de datum van uitgifte.

### Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs in Iceland and the Ministry of Finance in the Netherlands regarding the exchange of information in tax matters

### Preamble

The Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs in Iceland and the Ministry of Finance in the Netherlands, hereinafter: the ‘Participants’, considering the desire to intensify mutual cooperation in tax matters, have agreed the following.

### General provisions

### 1. Legal basis

Pursuant to the provisions with regard to the exchange of information of the Convention on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters, closed in Strasbourg on 25 January 1988, as amended in 2010, and article 28 of the Convention between the Republic of Iceland and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, signed in Reykjavik on 25 September 1997, the competent authorities referred to under 2 of this Memorandum will exchange information automatically.

### 2. Competent authorities

### Exchange of information

### 3. Automatic exchange of information

### 4. Incidental target group campaigns

The competent authorities can agree by exchange of letters to exchange categories of information, other than the above mentioned categories, automatically or intensified spontaneously for a certain period.

### 5. The presence of tax officials of one State on the territory of the other State

### Various provisions

### 6. Various provisions

### Final provisions

### 7. Coming into effect. Amendments. Termination.

### 8. Short title

This Memorandum may be referred to as ‘Memorandum of Understanding between Iceland and the Netherlands on the exchange of information in tax matters.’

### 9. Evaluation

This Memorandum will be evaluated five years after the date of commencement. However, questions with regard to this Memorandum can be taken up at any time at the request of one of the competent authorities.

Done in duplicate in the English language.
