---
title: "Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en het Internationaal Strafhof betreffende afspraken voor de voortzetting van de 13e zitting van de Vergadering van Staten die Partij zijn te 's-Gravenhage op 24 - 25 juni 2015"
identifier: "BWBV0006524"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2016-06-12"
last_updated: "2015-06-12"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0006524"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10005319363"
version_id: "10005720442"
internal_id: "C10008853471"
label_id: "10005302094"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2016-06-12"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0006524/2016-06-12/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2015-93"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2015-06-18"
intitule_in_force: "2015-06-18"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2015-93"
original_published_date: "2015-06-18"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2015-93"
entry_into_force_date: "2016-06-12"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0006524&z=2016-06-12&g=2016-06-12"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0006524&g=2016-06-12"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2016-06-12"
---
# Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en het Internationaal Strafhof betreffende afspraken voor de voortzetting van de 13e zitting van de Vergadering van Staten die Partij zijn te 's-Gravenhage op 24 - 25 juni 2015

Whereas the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court has accepted the invitation of the Kingdom of The Netherlands to hold the resumed thirteenth session of the Assembly of States Parties (“ASP”) at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of The Netherlands with the host State assuming the cost for the conference facilities and services incurred at the Ministry (Decision of the Bureau of the ASP ICC-ASP-2015-01-23Jan2015);

Whereas the Kingdom of The Netherlands and the International Criminal Court are parties to the [Headquarters Agreement between the International Criminal Court and the host State](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002899) (“the Headquarters Agreement”);

Now, therefore the International Criminal Court and the Kingdom of The Netherlands (“the host State”) agree as follows:

##### Article 1. Scope and Purpose

1. The present Agreement and its annex constitute a supplementary agreement under [article 52(2) of the Headquarters Agreement](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002899&artikel=52).

2. The present Agreement and its annex set out the modalities on which the host State provides facilities and services required by the International Criminal Court for the holding of its resumed thirteenth session.

##### Article 2. Facilities and Services

1. The host State shall host the resumed thirteenth session of the ASP on 24th–25th June 2015 in dedicated areas of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the host State in The Hague (“the Facility”). These areas are listed in the annex to the present Agreement.

2. Pursuant to [article 1(x) of the Headquarters Agreement](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002899&artikel=1), the Facility shall be considered premises of the Court for the whole periods specified in the annex to the present Agreement.

3. The host State shall provide to the International Criminal Court the services set out in the annex to this Agreement for the whole periods specified in the annex to the present Agreement.

##### Article 3. Participation in the Resumed Thirteenth Session of the ASP

Participation in the resumed thirteenth session shall be open to the following, as determined by the Secretariat of the ASP:

- a). Representatives of States Parties to the [Rome Statute](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0001489);

- b). Observer States, as referred to in [article 112, paragraph 1, of the Rome Statute](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0001489&artikel=112);

- c). Other States not having Observer Status;

- d). Representatives of intergovernmental organisations (“IGOs”) and non-governmental organisations (“NGOs”) registered by the Secretariat of the ASP;

- e). Officials and staff of the Court;

- f). Representatives of subsidiary bodies of the ASP and representatives of the Board of directors of the Trust Fund for Victims;

- g). Other persons accredited or invited to attend the resumed thirteenth session, including representatives of press, radio, television and other information media.

##### Article 4. Security and Access

1. The Security Staff of the International Criminal Court shall have the sole responsibility for ensuring security within the Facility used for the resumed thirteenth session. For that purpose, the host State authorises the designated staff of the Court to wear its uniform in and at the entrance of the Facility.

2. The host State shall ensure the security outside the Facility and may be invited to support the Security Staff of the International Criminal Court in case of need. In case of fire or other emergency requiring prompt protective action, or in the event that the Dutch security staff have reasonable cause to believe that such an emergency has occurred or is about to occur in the Facility, the consent of the Registrar, or a member of staff of the Court designated by him or her, to any necessary entry into the premises of the Court shall be presumed. The host State and the International Criminal Court shall designate a focal point specifically for issues regarding security of and access to the Facility during the resumed thirteenth session.

3. The host State shall provide badges and ensure access control to the Facility as part of its normal entry process on the basis of the list of participants communicated by the Secretariat of the ASP to the host State.

##### Article 5. Costs

1. The host State assumes all the costs incurred for the conference facilities and the provision of the services listed in the annex to the present Agreement.

2. All other costs shall be assumed by the International Criminal Court.

##### Article 6. Visas

1. Representatives of States participating in the resumed thirteenth session of the ASP, members of the Bureau and members of subsidiary bodies of the ASP, representatives of other States attending the resumed thirteenth session as observers in accordance with [article 112, paragraph 1, of the Statute](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0001489&artikel=112), and representatives of States and of intergovernmental organisations registered by the Secretariat of the ASP shall have the right to unimpeded entry into, exit from and movement within the host State, including unimpeded access to the Facility.

2. Visas, where required, shall be granted free of charge and as promptly as possible to the persons referred to in paragraph 1 above.

3. In accordance with [article 40 of the Headquarters Agreement](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002899&artikel=40), the host State shall take all necessary measures to facilitate the entry into its territory of the representatives of non-governmental organisations registered by the Secretariat of the ASP for the purpose of attending the resumed thirteenth session.

##### Article 7. Channel of communication

1. For the purpose of the present Agreement, the International Criminal Court designates the Director of the Secretariat of the Assembly of States Parties, or a member of the Court designated by him, as focal point for issues related to the implementation of the present Agreement other than security issues.

2. The host State designates the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the International Criminal Court, or a civil servant of the ministry of Foreign Affairs designated by him, as focal point for issues related to the implementation of the present Agreement other than security issues.

3. The focal points for security issues shall be designated pursuant to [article 4, paragraph 2](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0006524&artikel=4&z=2015-06-12&g=2015-06-12), of the present Agreement.

##### Article 8. Final Provisions

1. The annex to the present Agreement shall form an integral part of the Agreement.

2. The present Agreement shall enter into force on the date of its signature by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the International Criminal Court and shall remain in force for the duration of the resumption of the thirteenth Assembly of States Parties and for such period thereafter as necessary for all matters related to its provisions to be settled, the total duration of this Agreement, however, not to exceed one year.

DONE at The Hague on 12 June 2015 in duplicate, in the English language.

**For the Kingdom of The Netherlands,**

E.P. STEHOUWER

**For the International Criminal Court,**

H. VON HEBEL
