---
title: "Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en de VN Wereld Toerisme Organisatie (UNWTO) ten behoeve van het houden van een UNWTO-conferentie inzake religieus erfgoed en toerisme: “How to increase religious heritage tourism in a changing society”"
identifier: "BWBV0006599"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2017-06-13"
last_updated: "2016-06-13"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0006599"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10005362493"
version_id: "10005785892"
internal_id: "C10009114931"
label_id: "10005345074"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2017-06-13"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0006599/2017-06-13/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2016-92"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2016-06-28"
intitule_in_force: "2016-06-28"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2016-92"
original_published_date: "2016-06-28"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2016-92"
entry_into_force_date: "2017-06-13"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0006599&z=2017-06-13&g=2017-06-13"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0006599&g=2017-06-13"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2017-06-13"
---
# Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en de VN Wereld Toerisme Organisatie (UNWTO) ten behoeve van het houden van een UNWTO-conferentie inzake religieus erfgoed en toerisme: “How to increase religious heritage tourism in a changing society”

Relating to the hosting of the UNWTO Conference on Religious Heritage and Tourism: How to increase religious heritage tourism in a changing society (hereinafter, the “conference”) in Utrecht, the Netherlands on 5 to 7 October 2016 by the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands;

Whereas the Government of Kingdom of the Netherlands (hereinafter, the “Government”), duly represented by its Ambassador Matthijs van Bonzel, will be hosting the conference; which is of special interest to the Cultural Heritage Agency of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science of the Netherlands, an Agency that supports activities that contribute to the national heritage management;

Whereas the World Tourism Organization (hereinafter referred to as “UNWTO” or the “Organization”), represented by its Secretary-General Mr. Taleb Rifai, is a specialized agency of the United Nations and the leading public international organization in the field of tourism, with a membership encompassing 163 countries and territories and more than 480 Affiliate Members representing the private sector, educational institutions, tourism associations ‎and local tourism authorities;

Whereas UNWTO wishes to conduct a conference on “Religious Heritage and Tourism: How to increase religious heritage tourism in a changing society” with the objective to discuss the interaction between religious heritage and tourism and how this linkage could be further enhanced in a sustainable way and the Government is willing and able to host it;

Now therefore, the parties have agreed as follows:

##### I. Privileges, immunities and facilities

1. Participants are invited by the Secretary-General of the Organization to attend the conference. The Secretariat shall provide in due course the names of those accepting this invitation to the authorities duly designated for this purpose by the Government, so that their travel and stay in that country can be prepared under the best possible conditions.

2. This agreement is based on [Article 32 of the Statutes of the World Tourism Organization](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0004272&artikel=32), which reads as follows: “The Organization shall enjoy in the territories of its member States the privileges and immunities required for the exercise of its functions. Such privileges and immunities may be defined by agreements concluded by the Organization”, as well as on Resolution 662(XXI) of the twenty-first General Assembly of UNWTO.

3. The [Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the specialized agencies](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005536) of 1947 and its Annex XVIII (hereinafter, the “Convention”) adopted by the seventeenth General Assembly through resolution 545 (XVII) shall be applicable in respect of the conference.

4. When participants are representatives of UNWTO members, they will enjoy the privileges and immunities granted to delegates at the conferences of specialized agencies of the United Nations, as provided for under [Article V of the Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005536&artikel=V). The privileges and immunities under Annex XVIII of the Convention will be granted as and when applicable.

5. All participants and all persons performing functions in connection with the Meeting shall have the right of unimpeded entry into and exit from the Netherlands, provided that, when necessary, visa applications are submitted in good time before the opening of the meeting in accordance with internal procedures. The Government shall take appropriate measures to facilitate the entry into, stay and departure from its territory to the participants, regardless of their nationality. The Government, as a gesture of goodwill towards the UNWTO and its Members will, without discrimination, use their best efforts to have the necessary visas issued free of charge and without delay.

6. The Secretary-General of the Organization shall be accorded the privileges and immunities, exemptions and facilities granted to heads of diplomatic missions, as provided for under [Article VI of the Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005536&artikel=VI).

7. The Organization's officials will also enjoy the privileges and immunities granted for the conferences of specialized agencies of the United Nations, as provided for under [Articles VI](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005536&artikel=VI) and [VIII of the Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005536&artikel=VIII).

8. Without prejudice to the provisions of the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005536), all participants and persons performing functions in connection with the Meeting shall enjoy such privileges and immunities and facilities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Meeting.

##### II. Conditions for organizing the Conference

1. The Conference will be held in the Dom Church, Utrecht, the Netherlands, from 5 to 7 October 2016.

2. The Government shall provide the Organization for the purposes of this Conference with staff, offices, office furnishings and reproduction equipment for the documents required during the Conference, as enumerated in [Annex I](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0006599&bijlage=I&z=2016-06-13&g=2016-06-13) which is an integral part of this Agreement. Unless otherwise agreed, the goods in kind will return to the corresponding providing party upon completion of the project.

3. The Government shall indemnify and hold harmless the Organization in respect of any action, claim or demand for any injury or damage that might occur to the persons or facilities provided by the Government except where such injury or damage is caused by the gross negligence or wilful misconduct of the Organization or its officials.

4. The Conference room, offices and other premises made available by the Government shall constitute the conference area and shall be considered as premises of UNWTO during the Conference, for the duration of any additional period necessary to prepare and to conclude the operations of the same.

5. The parties may agree to external sponsorship of the conference with a view to enhancing its quality and improving its organization. Any sponsorship arranged by either party, including all its terms, shall be subject to the express agreement, in writing, of the other party.

6. Considering the mandatory security standards required by the United Nations Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS), the Government shall take the necessary measures to ensure the safety and security of the delegates, staff and visitors participating in the event. The Host country will provide protection to ensure the effective functioning of the event in an atmosphere of security and tranquillity, free from any security disruption, including the following procedures:

- –. Verify the event’s locations (Hotel/Accommodation & event´s venue) and perimeter, check the security materials and their good using-order, as well as checking the personnel needed in order to draw-up the Security Plan.

- –. Check that all valid security measures for the fire, emergency exits, etc. are in force and being carried out at the location and its perimeter.

- –. Designate a Responsible for Security so that the Security Department at UNWTO can liaise with him/her at all times.

- –. Take all necessary measures for the participants’ security at all times, especially in the case of VIPs (pick-up, transfers and placing).

- –. Implement a correct access system for the event’s location. Distribute relevant security information to participants. This information should cover basic security norms to be followed in the case of emergencies (evacuation plan), indicating emergency routes and exits, the location of the medical facilities, relevant emergency numbers, and others.

7. Any use of the name and/or emblem, flag or abbreviation of the name of the Organization in connection with the Conference shall be subject to prior request to the Organization and written authorization from the Secretariat, including the terms and conditions for the use of UNWTO signs.

8. Any amendment to this Agreement or to any Annex hereto shall be effected by mutual agreement of the parties through an appropriate supplementary letter of agreement.

9. Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out or in connection with this Agreement or any breach thereof, shall, unless it is settled by direct negotiation, be submitted at the request of either party for arbitration in accordance with UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The parties agree to be bound by any arbitration award rendered in accordance with this provision as the final adjudication of any dispute.

10. Nothing in or relating to this Agreement shall be deemed to represent a waiver of the Privileges and Immunities of UNWTO.

11. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of its signature and shall remain applicable throughout the Conference and for the duration of any additional period necessary to prepare for and to conclude the operations thereof. However, the total duration of this Agreement shall not exceed one year.

DONE at Madrid on 13 June 2016 in two originals in the English language.

**For the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,**

MATTHIJS VAN BONZEL

Ambassador

**For the World Tourism Organization,**

TALEB RIFAI

Secretary-General
