---
title: "Protocol betreffende de authentieke tekst in vier talen van het op 7 december 1944 te Chicago tot stand gekomen Verdrag inzake de internationale burgerluchtvaart"
identifier: "BWBV0003601"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "1999-09-16"
last_updated: "1999-09-16"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0003601"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10003600853"
version_id: "10003660772"
internal_id: "C10006981111"
label_id: "10003586124"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "1999-09-16"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0003601/1999-09-16/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.1979-87"
intitule_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
intitule_published: "1979-05-22"
intitule_in_force: "2000-07-28"
intitule_status: "goed"
original_publication: "Trb.1979-87"
original_published_date: "1979-05-22"
original_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-1979-87"
entry_into_force_date: "1999-09-16"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0003601&z=1999-09-16&g=1999-09-16"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0003601&g=1999-09-16"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "1999-09-16"
---
# Protocol betreffende de authentieke tekst in vier talen van het op 7 december 1944 te Chicago tot stand gekomen Verdrag inzake de internationale burgerluchtvaart

The undersigned Governments,

Considering that the 21st Session of the Assembly of the International Civil Aviation Organization requested the Council of this Organization “to undertake the necessary measures for the preparation of the authentic text of the [Convention on International Civil Aviation](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) in the Russian language, with the aim of having it approved not later than the year 1977”;

Considering that the English text of the [Convention on International Civil Aviation](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) was opened for signature at Chicago on 7 December 1944;

Considering that, pursuant to the [Protocol signed at Buenos Aires on 24 September 1968 on the authentic trilingual text of the Convention on International Civil Aviation](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0004681) done at Chicago, 7 December 1944, the text of the [Convention on International Civil Aviation](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) (hereinafter called the Convention) was adopted in the French and Spanish languages and, together with the text of the Convention in the English language, constitutes the text equally authentic in the three languages as provided for in the final clause of the Convention;

Considering accordingly, that it is appropriate to make the necessary provision for the text of the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) to exist in the Russian language;

Considering that in making such provision account must be taken of the existing amendments to the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) in the English, French and Spanish languages, the texts of which are equally authentic and that, according to [Article 94 (a) of the Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507&artikel=94), any amendment can come into force only in respect of any State which has ratified it;

Have agreed as follows:

##### Article I

The text of the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) and of the amendments thereto in the Russian language annexed to this Protocol, together with the text of the Convention and of the amendments thereto in the English, French and Spanish languages, constitutes a text equally authentic in the four languages.

##### Article II

If a State party to this Protocol has ratified or in the future ratifies any amendment made to the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) in accordance with [Article 94(a) thereof](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507&artikel=94), then the text of such amendment in the Russian, English, French and Spanish languages shall be deemed to refer to the text equally authentic in the four languages, which results from this Protocol.

##### Article III

1). The States members of the International Civil Aviation Organization, may become parties to the present Protocol either by:

- a). signature without reservation as to acceptance, or

- b). signature with reservation as to acceptance followed by acceptance, or

- c). acceptance.

2). This Protocol shall remain open for signature at Montreal until the 5th of October 1977 and thereafter at Washington, D.C.

3). Acceptance shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of acceptance with the Government of the United States of America.

4). Adherence to or ratification or approval of this Protocol shall be deemed to be acceptance thereof.

##### Article IV

1). This Protocol shall come into force on the thirtieth day after twelve States shall, in accordance with the provisions of Article III, have signed it without reservation as to acceptance or accepted it and after entry into force of the amendment to the final clause of the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507), which provides that the text of the Convention in the Russian language is of equal authenticity.

2). As regards any State which shall subsequently become a party to this Protocol in accordance with Article III, the Protocol shall come into force on the date of its signature without reservation as to acceptance or of its acceptance.

##### Article V

Any adherence of a State to the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) after this Protocol has entered into force shall be deemed to be acceptance of this Protocol.

##### Article VI

Acceptance by a State of this Protocol shall not be regarded as ratification by it of any amendment to the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507).

##### Article VII

As soon as this Protocol conies into force, it shall be registered with the United Nations and with the International Civil Aviation Organization by the Government of the United States of America.

##### Article VIII

1). This Protocol shall remain in force so long as the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507) is in force.

2). This Protocol shall cease to be in force for a State only when that State ceases to be a party to the [Convention](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005507).

##### Article IX

The Government of the United States of America shall give notice to all States members of the International Civil Aviation Organization and to the Organization itself:

- a). of any signature of this Protocol and the date thereof, with an indication whether the signature is with or without reservation as to acceptance;

- b). of the deposit of any instrument of acceptance and the date thereof;

- c). of the date on which this Protocol comes into force in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, paragraph 1.

##### Article X

This Protocol, drawn up in the English, French, Russian and Spanish languages, each text being equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the Government of the United States of America, which shall transmit duly certified copies thereof to the Governments of the States members of the International Civil Aviation Organization.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, duly authorized, have signed this Protocol.

DONE at Montreal this thirtieth day of September, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-seven.
