---
title: "Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en de Federatie van Saint Kitts en Nevis inzake maritieme afbakening (met Bijlage)"
identifier: "BWBV0007056"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2024-04-04"
last_updated: "2024-04-04"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0007056"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10005665713"
version_id: "10006242232"
internal_id: "C10010101581"
label_id: "10005647124"
dtd_version: "2.0"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0007056/2024-04-04/0"
intitule_status: "nogniet"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0007056&z=2024-04-04&g=2024-04-04"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0007056&g=2024-04-04"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
short_title: "Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en de Federatie van Saint Kitts en Nevis inzake maritieme afbakening"
---
# Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en de Federatie van Saint Kitts en Nevis inzake maritieme afbakening (met Bijlage)

The Kingdom of the Netherlands

and

the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis,

hereinafter referred to as “the Parties”;

Desiring to strengthen the bonds of friendship between the Parties;

Desiring to establish an equitable delimitation of all maritime zones belonging to each of the Parties;

Recalling the relevant provisions of the [United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea](onbekend) of 10 December 1982;

Have agreed as follows:

##### Article 1

1. This Agreement shall establish the delimitation of all maritime zones between the Parties.

2. A decision of a Party to establish, extend or amend its maritime zones shall be in accordance with this Agreement.

##### Article 2

1. The maritime delimitation between the Parties is based on equidistance and shall be the line formed by the geodesics connecting points defined by their coordinates:

| Point | Latitude North | Longitude West |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1. | 17° 35’ 58.77” | 62° 48’ 15.30” |
| 2. | 17° 29’ 41.88” | 62° 51’ 28.66” |
| 3. | 17° 26’ 33.27” | 62° 53’ 48.63” |
| 4. | 17° 23’ 08.49” | 62° 56’ 51.25” |
| 5. | 17° 21’ 23.97” | 62° 58’ 37.43” |
| 6. | 17° 18’ 58.27” | 63° 00’ 56.35” |
| 7. | 17° 14’ 01.32” | 63° 05’ 30.24” |
| 8. | 17° 04’ 03.32” | 63° 14’ 32.30” |

2. The points defined by geographic coordinates are expressed in World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 84).

3. From point 1 the delimitation extends along a geodetic azimuth of 26.55 degrees until the delimitation with a third state is reached.

4. From point 8 the delimitation extends along a geodetic azimuth of 222.74 degrees until the delimitation with a third state is reached.

5. For illustrative purposes, this delimitation is depicted on a chart annexed to this Agreement.

##### Article 3

The Parties will, as appropriate, and consistent with their international obligations and with due regard to the transfer of competencies to the European Union, consult with respect to marine governance issues of concern to them.

##### Article 4

In the event that a single geological structure or mineral field containing oil or natural gas should extend across the line established in [Article 2](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0007056&artikel=2&z=2024-04-04&g=2024-04-04), and a part of said structure or field that is situated on one side of the line could be exploited totally or partially from the other side of the line, the Parties, after holding technical consultations, will seek to reach agreement regarding the most effective way of exploiting said structure or field, and on the way in which the costs and benefits in relation to such activities shall be apportioned.

##### Article 5

1. Any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement shall be settled peacefully by consultation and negotiation, in accordance with international law.

2. In the event that no agreement can be reached within a reasonable period of time, either Party may have recourse to the dispute settlement provisions provided by [Part XV of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0003172&deel=XV).

##### Article 6

This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month after both Parties have notified each other in writing that the legal requirements for entry into force have been complied with.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the representatives of the Parties, being duly authorized for this purpose, have signed this Agreement.

DONE at Basseterre this 4th day of April 2024, in duplicate, in the English language.

**For the Kingdom of the Netherlands,**

COR HERSBACH

**For the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis,**

TIVANNA WHARTON
