---
title: "Administratief Akkoord tussen de Nederlandse Minister voor Europese Zaken en Ontwikkelingssamenwerking en de Afdeling Economische Betrekkingen van het Ministerie van Financiën van de Volksrepubliek Bangladesh inzake het project \"Char Development and Settlement Project IV (CDSP IV)\""
identifier: "BWBV0006052"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2018-01-04"
last_updated: "2018-01-04"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0006052"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10005003423"
version_id: "10005323922"
internal_id: "C10008202241"
label_id: "10004986484"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2018-01-04"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0006052/2018-01-04/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2012-217"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2012-11-29"
intitule_in_force: "2012-11-29"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2012-217"
original_published_date: "2012-11-29"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2012-217"
entry_into_force_date: "2018-01-04"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0006052&z=2018-01-04&g=2018-01-04"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0006052&g=2018-01-04"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2018-01-04"
---
# Administratief Akkoord tussen de Nederlandse Minister voor Europese Zaken en Ontwikkelingssamenwerking en de Afdeling Economische Betrekkingen van het Ministerie van Financiën van de Volksrepubliek Bangladesh inzake het project "Char Development and Settlement Project IV (CDSP IV)"

The Minister for European Affairs and International Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, being the competent Netherlands Authority for the purpose of this Administrative Arrangement, hereinafter referred to as “the Netherlands Party”, represented in this matter by the Ambassador of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in Dhaka,

and

The Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, being the competent Bangladesh Authority for the purpose of this Administrative Arrangement, hereinafter referred to as “the Bangladesh Party”,

Having regard to the provisions of [Article I of the Agreement on Technical Co-operation between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the People's Republic of Bangladesh](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005634&artikel=I) signed at Dhaka on 19 May 1977, hereinafter referred to as “the Agreement”,

Have entered into the following Administrative Arrangement:

##### Article I. (The Project)

Vervallen

##### Article II. (The contribution by the Netherlands Party)

Vervallen

##### Article III. (The contribution by the Bangladesh Party)

Vervallen

##### Article IV. (The Executive Authorities)

Vervallen

##### Article V. (Delegation)

Vervallen

##### Article VI. (The TL/DTL)

Vervallen

##### Article VII. (The Schedule of Operations)

Vervallen

##### Article VIII. (Status of the Netherlands Staff)

Vervallen

##### Article IX. (Equipment and Materials)

Vervallen

##### Article X. (Reporting)

Vervallen

##### Article XI. (Evaluation)

Vervallen

##### Article XII. (Settlement of disputes)

Vervallen

##### Article XIII. (Entry into force and duration)

Vervallen

DONE at Dhaka on 3rd January 2012 in two originals in the English language both texts being equally authentic.

**For and on behalf of the Minister for European Affairs and International Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,**

ALPHONS HENNEKENS

Ambassador

Kingdom of the Netherlands

Dhaka.

Dated: 03/01/2012

**For and on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, the Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance,**

IQBAL MAHMOOD

Secretary, ERD

Ministry of Finance.

Dated: 04/01/2012
