---
title: "Gedeeltelijke herziening van het Radioreglement"
identifier: "BWBV0004980"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "1990-03-16"
last_updated: "1990-03-16"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0004980"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10004419943"
version_id: "10004624722"
internal_id: "C10008343371"
label_id: "10004404644"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "1990-03-16"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0004980/1990-03-16/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.1990-132"
intitule_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
intitule_signed: "1992-10-23"
intitule_published: "1990-09-17"
intitule_in_force: "1990-09-17"
intitule_status: "goed"
original_publication: "Trb.1990-132"
original_signed_date: "1992-10-23"
original_published_date: "1990-09-17"
original_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-1990-132"
entry_into_force_date: "1990-03-16"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0004980&z=1990-03-16&g=1990-03-16"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0004980&g=1990-03-16"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
signed_date: "1992-10-23"
entry_into_force: "1990-03-16"
---
# Gedeeltelijke herziening van het Radioreglement

Geneva, 1988 (WARC Orb-88)

Preamble

The World Administrative Radio Conference, Geneva, 1979, resolved in its Resolution 3 that a World Administrative Radio Conference be convened, in two sessions to guarantee in practice for all countries equitable access to the geostationary-satellite orbit and the frequency bands allocated to space services.

The Plenipotentiary Conference (Nairobi, 1982), in its Resolution 1, included such a conference in the Union's calendar of conferences. In its Resolution 8, it also instructed the Administrative Council to consider the inclusion, in the agenda of the First Session, of the question of the planning of the bands allocated to the fixed-satellite service and reserved exclusively for feeder links for the broadcasting-satellite service.

The Administrative Council, at its 38th Session (1983), following consultations with the Members of the Union, adopted Resolution 895, by which it took the necessary steps to convene the First Session of this World Administrative Radio Conference, to be held in Geneva for a duration of five and a half weeks.

Accordingly, the First Session of the World Administrative Radio Conference on the Use of the Geostationary-Satellite Orbit and the Planning of the Space Services Utilizing It, (WARC Orb-85), was held in Geneva from 8 August to 15 September 1985 and adopted a Report to the Second Session. This Report included the principles and methods to guarantee in practice for all countries equitable access to the geostationary orbit and frequency bands allocated to space services as well as the technical parameters to be used for planning. It also contained guidelines for the work to be carried out by the permanent organs of the Union in preparation for the Second Session of the Conference.

At its 41st session (1986), the Administrative Council, by its Resolution 953, established the agenda for the Second Session of the Conference. At its 42nd session (1987), the Administrative Council, considering the results of consultations with the Members concerning the establishment of this agenda, resolved that the Second Session be convened in Geneva for five weeks and three days commencing on Monday, 29 August 1988.

Accordingly, the Second Session of the Conference (WARC Orb-88) met in Geneva for the stipulated period; it considered and, in conformity with its agenda, adopted a partial revision of the Radio Regulations and Appendices thereto, as contained in the present Final Acts and concerning the following:

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the delegates of the Members of the International Telecommunication Union named below have, on behalf of their respective competent authorities, signed one copy of the present Final Acts in the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish languages. In case of dispute, the French text shall prevail. This copy shall remain deposited in the archives of the Union. The Secretary-General shall forward one certified true copy to each Member of the International Telecommunication Union.

DONE at Geneva, 6 October 1988
