---
title: "Administratief Akkoord tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en Egypte inzake het project \"Fayoum Water Users Organisation Project\""
identifier: "BWBV0003036"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2011-12-31"
last_updated: "2011-12-31"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0003036"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10003298673"
version_id: "10003325202"
internal_id: "C10008471881"
label_id: "10003284424"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2011-12-31"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0003036/2011-12-31/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2008-118"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2008-06-16"
intitule_in_force: "2008-06-16"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2008-118"
original_published_date: "2008-06-16"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2008-118"
entry_into_force_date: "2011-12-31"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0003036&z=2011-12-31&g=2011-12-31"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0003036&g=2011-12-31"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2011-12-31"
---
# Administratief Akkoord tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en Egypte inzake het project "Fayoum Water Users Organisation Project"

The Minister for Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, being the competent Netherlands Authority for the purpose of this Administrative Arrangement, hereinafter referred to as “the Netherlands Party”, represented in this matter by the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands in Cairo,

and

the Minister of Water Resources and Irrigation of the Arab Republic of Egypt being the competent Egyptian Authority for the purpose of this Administrative Arrangement, hereinafter referred to as the “the Egyptian party”;

Having decided to cooperate in the field of “Water Management in Fayoum”

Having regard to the provision of Article I of the Agreement on Technical Cooperation between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Arab Republic of Egypt, signed in Cairo on 30 October 1976, hereinafter referred to as the Agreement”,

Have entered into the following administrative arrangement:

##### Article I. The Project

Vervallen

##### Article II. The Netherlands Contribution

Vervallen

##### Article III. The Egyptian Contribution

Vervallen

##### Article IV. The Executive Authorities

Vervallen

##### Article V. Delegation

Vervallen

##### Article VI. The Team leader

Vervallen

##### Article VIII. The Schedule of Operations

Vervallen

##### Article VIII. Reporting

The Team leader shall submit six-monthly reports in the English language on the progress made in the execution of the Project to both Executive Authorities. Narrative and financial reporting will reflect on activities implemented with the Netherlands and Egyptian contributions. At the termination of the Project, the Team leader shall submit a final report in the English language on all aspects of the work done in connection with the Project to all parties involved.

Concerning the “Contribution Arrangements”, the MWRI shall present, in English, to the Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, six-monthly progress and financial reports and claims and a final report at the end of the Project.

##### Article IX. Status of the Netherlands Staff

Vervallen

##### Article X. Status of Netherlands Equipment and Materials

Vervallen

##### Article XI. Evaluation

Vervallen

##### Article XII. Settlement of Disputes

Vervallen

##### Article XIII. Entry into Force and Duration

Vervallen

DONE in Cairo on the 12th of April 2007, in two originals in the English language.

**For the Minister for Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of The Netherlands,**

T.F. DE ZWAAN

Ambassador

**The Minister of Water Resources and Irrigation of the Arab Republic of Egypt,**

MAHMOUD ABU. ZEID

##### Article VIII. Reporting

Vervallen
