---
title: "Luchtvaartverdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden voor de Nederlandse Antillen en de Verenigde Staten van Amerika inzake het luchtvervoer tussen de Nederlandse Antillen en de Verenigde Staten van Amerika"
identifier: "BWBV0001976"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2018-10-01"
last_updated: "2018-10-01"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0001976"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10002589113"
version_id: "10005910322"
internal_id: "C10009432611"
label_id: "10002578514"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2018-10-01"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0001976/2018-10-01/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2018-164"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2018-09-07"
intitule_in_force: "2018-09-07"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2018-164"
original_published_date: "2018-09-07"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2018-164"
entry_into_force_date: "2018-10-01"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0001976&z=2018-10-01&g=2018-10-01"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0001976&g=2018-10-01"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2018-10-01"
---
# Luchtvaartverdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden voor de Nederlandse Antillen en de Verenigde Staten van Amerika inzake het luchtvervoer tussen de Nederlandse Antillen en de Verenigde Staten van Amerika

The Kingdom of the Netherlands in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and the United States of America (hereinafter, “the Parties");

Desiring to promote an international aviation system based on competition among airlines in the marketplace with minimum government interference and regulation;

Desiring to facilitate the expansion of international air transport opportunities;

Desiring to make it possible for airlines to offer the travelling and shipping public a variety of service options at the lowest prices that are not discriminatory and do not represent abuse of a dominant position, and wishing to encourage individual airlines to develop and implement innovative and competitive prices;

Desiring to ensure the highest degree of safety and security in international air transport and reaffirming their grave concern about acts or threats against the security of aircraft, which jeopardize the safety of persons or property, adversely affect the operation of air transportation, and undermine public confidence in the safety of civil aviation; and

Being Parties to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, opened for signature at Chicago on December 7, 1944;

Have agreed as follows:

##### Article 1. Definitions

Vervallen

##### Article 2. Grant of Rights

Vervallen

##### Article 3. Designation and Authorization

Vervallen

##### Article 4. Revocation of Authorization

Vervallen

##### Article 5. Application of Laws

Vervallen

##### Article 6. Safety

Vervallen

##### Article 7. Aviation Security

Vervallen

##### Article 8. Commercial Opportunities

Vervallen

##### Article 9. Customs Duties and Charges

Vervallen

##### Article 10. User Charges

Vervallen

##### Article 11. Fair Competition

Vervallen

##### Article 12. Pricing

Vervallen

##### Article 13. Consultations

Vervallen

##### Article l4. Settlement of Disputes

Vervallen

##### Article 15. Termination

Vervallen

##### Article 16. Registration with ICAO

Vervallen

##### Article 17. Entry into Force

Vervallen

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.

DONE at Washington in duplicate, this fourteenth day of July, 1998.

**For the Kingdom of the Netherlands in respect of the Netherlands Antilles**

(sd.) M. H. P. P. ADRIAENS

**For the United States of America**

(sd.) ALAN P. LARSON
