---
title: "Administratief Akkoord tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en Egypte inzake het project \"Preparatory Activities Component - Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management Project (PAC-IIIMP) or WaterBoards-IIIMP\""
identifier: "BWBV0003035"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2009-04-30"
last_updated: "2006-05-02"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0003035"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10003298463"
version_id: "10003324822"
internal_id: "C10008471861"
label_id: "10003284214"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2009-04-30"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0003035/2009-04-30/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2008-118"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2008-06-16"
intitule_in_force: "2008-06-16"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2008-118"
original_published_date: "2008-06-16"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2008-118"
entry_into_force_date: "2009-04-30"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0003035&z=2009-04-30&g=2009-04-30"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0003035&g=2009-04-30"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2009-04-30"
---
# Administratief Akkoord tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en Egypte inzake het project "Preparatory Activities Component - Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management Project (PAC-IIIMP) or WaterBoards-IIIMP"

The Netherlands Minister for Development Cooperation, being the competent Netherlands Authority for the purpose of this Administrative Arrangement, hereinafter referred to as “the Netherlands Party”, represented in this matter by the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands in Cairo, Mr. T.F. de Zwaan,

and

the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, represented in this matter by The Minister, Dr. Mahmoud Abu Zeid, being the competent Egyptian Authority for the purpose of this Administrative Arrangement, hereinafter referred to as the “Egyptian Party”,

Having decided to cooperate in the field of Integrated Water Management, specifically through the Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management Project (IIIMP) with the World Bank (WB) and German Development Bank (KfW),

Having regard to the provisions of Article I of the Agreement concerning Technical Cooperation between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Arab Republic of Egypt signed in Cairo on October 30, 1976, hereinafter referred to as “the Agreement”,

Have agreed as follows:

##### Article I. The Project

1. The two Parties shall jointly carry out a project, to be known as the “Preparatory Activities Component – Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management Project (PAC-IIIMP) or Water Boards-IIIMP”, hereinafter referred to as “the Project”.

2. The aim of the Project is to assist the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation in improving the management of irrigation and drainage in the areas of the Nile Delta Region (Mahmoudia and Meet Yazid) through the formation of water user organisation and to improve the capacity of governmental organisations.

3. The cooperation between the two Parties is planned for the period May 1st 2006 to 30th April 2009.

##### Article II. The Netherlands Contribution

1. The Netherlands Party shall provide technical assistance in the form of a consultancy contract including

- –. provision of expatriate and local consultants and support staff;

- –. investment costs for materials and vehicles;

- –. operational costs;

- –. costs for training.

These activities will be carried out by an international consultancy firm. A contract will be concluded between the Netherlands Embassy and the International consultancy firm.

2. The value of the Netherlands contribution to the implementation of the Project is estimated at the amount of EUR 4,268,890.04.

##### Article III. The Egyptian Contribution

1. The Egyptian Party shall make the following contribution to the Project:

- –. provide staff with adequate capabilities to perform all tasks and will provide office space for the project team.

2. The total value of the Egyptian contribution is in-kind.

##### Article IV. The Executive Authorities

1. The Netherlands Party shall appoint the Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in Cairo as the Netherlands Executive Authority in charge of the implementation of the Project.

2. The Egyptian Party shall appoint a responsible entity within the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation to be in charge of the implementation of the Project.

3. The above mentioned Netherlands Executive Authority shall be represented in Egypt, as far as the day to day operations of the Project are concerned, by the Netherlands Project Team Leader.

##### Article V. Delegation

Each of the Executive Authorities, mentioned in Article IV, shall be entitled to delegate under its own responsibility, partly or entirely, its duties in connection with the Project to a third party. In doing so, the Executive Authorities shall inform each other in writing of the names of the persons or institutions delegated and of the extent of the delegation.

##### Article VI. The Consultant

The Netherlands Consultancy Office shall be responsible to the Netherlands Executive Authority for the correct implementation of the Netherlands contribution.

The Consultancy Office shall act in close consultation with the Egyptian Executive Authority and respect the operational instructions given by the said Authority to the Egyptian personnel. The Egyptian Executive Authority shall provide the Consultancy Office with any information that may be considered necessary by both parties for the execution of the Project and arrange meetings with local government and other authorities as necessary during the course of the Consultant’s work.

##### Article VII. The Working Document

1. The Executive Authorities shall establish by mutual consent a Working Document stating in detail the contribution of either Party, the number and duties of the personnel, their job-descriptions, a time-table and a list of equipment and materials to be supplied by either Party. This document is based on the Terms of Reference of the Preparatory Activities Component of IIIMP (PAC-IIIP), which is part of the Project Appraisal Document for Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management Project (IIIMP).

2. The Working Document may be amended by mutual consent by the Executive Authorities.

3. The Working Document shall form an integral part of this Administrative Arrangement.

##### Article VIII. Status of Netherlands Staff

The Netherlands staff to this Project shall enjoy the privileges and facilities mentioned in Articles II and III of the Agreement.

##### Article IX. Status of the Netherlands Equipment and Materials

In conformity with the provisions of Article 5 of the Agreement, the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt will exempt from all import duties and other charges the equipment (inclusive passenger cars, spare parts, etc.) and other supplies provided by the Netherlands Government in connection with the Project.

Upon completion of the project the ownership of the equipment and materials of the project shall be transferred to the Government of Egypt unless otherwise agreed between the Executive Authorities.

##### Article X. Reporting

The Netherlands Consultant shall submit to both Executive Authorities the following reports (in English):

- –. Inception Report, due on August 1st, 2006

- –. Annual work Plan and budget, due every calendar year on 15th October

- –. Semi-annual progress report (narrative and financial), due within two months after the end of the period

- –. Final narrative and financial report over the project period May 1st, 2006 till April 30th, 2009, due on August 1st, 2009.

##### Article XI. Evaluation

1. No external evaluation has been planned; however, should either of the Executive Authorities deem it required, an external joint-evaluation will be arranged for which the required costs will be availed.

2. Internal evaluation is carried out in the form of reviews, progress monitoring and the information systems included in the Project Appraisal Document for IIIMP.

3. The composition of the evaluation missions will be defined jointly by the Executive Authorities.

##### Article XII. Settlement of Disputes

Any dispute arising out of the interpretation or implementation of this Administrative Arrangement which cannot be settled by consultations between the two Parties shall be referred to the respective Governments.

##### Article XIII. Entry into Force and Duration

This Administrative Arrangement shall enter with retroactive effect to 1 May 2006. It shall expire either at the end of the period stated in Article I, paragraph 3, of this Arrangement or on the date on which the Project has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this Arrangement and of the Working Document, whichever date is the later.

DONE at Cairo on the 17th day of September 2006, in two originals in the English language.

**For the Netherlands Minister for Development Cooperation,**

T.F. DE ZWAAN

Ambassador

**For the Egyptian Minister of Water Resources and Irrigation,**

MAHMOUD ABU. ZEID

Minister of Water Resources and Irrigation
