---
title: "Slotdocument inzake de eerste Toetsingsconferentie van het Verdrag inzake Conventionele strijdkrachten in Europa"
identifier: "BWBV0001228"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "1997-05-15"
last_updated: "1997-05-15"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0001228"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10001933933"
version_id: "10002022302"
internal_id: "C10006988871"
label_id: "10001934334"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "1997-05-15"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0001228/1997-05-15/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.1996-256"
intitule_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
intitule_signed: "1996-05-31"
intitule_published: "1996-09-27"
intitule_in_force: "1997-07-30"
intitule_status: "goed"
original_publication: "Trb.1996-256"
original_signed_date: "1996-05-31"
original_published_date: "1996-09-27"
original_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-1996-256"
entry_into_force_date: "1997-05-15"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0001228&z=1997-05-15&g=1997-05-15"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0001228&g=1997-05-15"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
signed_date: "1996-05-31"
entry_into_force: "1997-05-15"
---
# Slotdocument inzake de eerste Toetsingsconferentie van het Verdrag inzake Conventionele strijdkrachten in Europa

Vienna, 15–31 May 1996

The Republic of Armenia, the Azerbaijan Republic, the Republic of Belarus, the Kingdom of Belgium, the Republic of Bulgaria, Canada, the Czech Republic, the Kingdom of Denmark, the French Republic, Georgia, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Hellenic Republic, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Iceland, the Italian Republic, the Republic of Kazakstan, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Republic of Moldova, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of Norway, the Republic of Poland, the Portuguese Republic, Romania, the Russian Federation, the Slovak Republic, the Kingdom of Spain, the Republic of Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, which are the States Parties to the [Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe of 19 November 1990](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009), hereinafter referred to as the States Parties,

Fulfilling the obligation set forth in [Article XXI, paragraph 1, of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=XXI), hereinafter referred to as the Treaty, to conduct a review of the operation of the Treaty, and thereby taking into account the Final Documents of the Extraordinary Conferences of the States Parties of 10 July 1992 in Helsinki and 13 November 1992 in Vienna,

Acting in accordance with the provision of Section VII, paragraph 3, of the Concluding Act of the Negotiation on Personnel Strength of Conventional Armed Forces in Europe of 10 July 1992, hereinafter referred to as the Concluding Act,

Recalling the results of the Extraordinary Conferences held thus far,

Reaffirming all the decisions of the Joint Consultative Group made thus far,

Having met at the First Review Conference, chaired by the Kingdom of the Netherlands, from 15 to 31 May 1996 in Vienna,

Have adopted the following:

The 30 States Parties to the [Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe of November 19, 1990](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009), hereinafter referred to as the Treaty,

Have agreed as follows:

##### I

1. Each State Party shall, taking into account the clarification set forth in this Document relating to the area described in [Article V, subparagraph 1(A), of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=V) and taking into account the understandings on flexibility set forth in this Document, comply fully with the numerical limitations set forth in the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009), including [Article V](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=V) thereof, no later than 31 May 1999.

2. Paragraph 1 of this Section shall be understood as not giving any State Party, which was in compliance with the numerical limitations set forth in the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009), including [Article V](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=V) thereof, as of 1 January 1996, the right to exceed any of the numerical limitations set forth in the Treaty.

3. Pursuant to the Decision of the Joint Consultative Group of 17 November 1995, the States Parties shall co-operate to the maximum extent possible to ensure the full implementation of the provisions of this Document.

##### II

1. Within the area described in [Article V, subparagraph 1(A), of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=V), as understood by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics at the time the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009) was signed, Russian Federation shall limit its battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, and artillery so that, no later than 31 May 1999 and thereafter, the aggregate numbers do not exceed:

- A). 1,800 battle tanks;

- B). 3,700 armoured combat vehicles, of which no more than 552 shall be located within the Astrakhan oblast; no more than 552 shall be located within the Volgograd oblast; no more than 310 shall be located within the eastern part of the Rostov oblast described in Section III, paragraph 1, of this Document; and no more than 600 shall be located within the Pskov oblast; and

- C). 2,400 pieces of artillery.

2. Within the Odessa oblast, Ukraine shall limit its battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, and artillery so that, upon provisional application of this Document and thereafter, the aggregate numbers do not exceed:

- A). 400 battle tanks;

- B). 400 armoured combat vehicles; and

- C). 350 pieces of artillery.

3. Upon provisional application of this Document and until 31 May 1999, the Russian Federation shall limit its battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, and artillery, within the area described in [Article V, subparagraph 1(A), of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=V), as understood by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics at the time the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009) was signed, so that the aggregate numbers do not exceed:

- A). 1,897 battle tanks;

- B). 4,397 armoured combat vehicles; and

- C). 2,422 pieces of artillery.

##### III

1. For the purposes of this Document and the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009), the following territory, as constituted on 1 January 1996, of the Russian Federation shall be deemed to be located in the area described in [Article IV, paragraph 2, of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=IV) rather than in the area described in [Article V, subparagraph 1(A), of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=V): the Pskov oblast; the Volgograd oblast; the Astrakhan oblast; that part of the Rostov oblast east of the line extending from Kushchevskaya to Volgodonsk to the Volgograd oblast border, including Volgodonsk; and Kushchevskaya and a narrow corridor in Krasnodar kray leading to Kushchevskaya.

2. For the purposes of this Document and the Treaty, the territory of the Odessa oblast, as constituted on 1 January 1996, of Ukraine shall be deemed to be located in the area described in [Article IV, paragraph 3, of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=IV) rather than in the area described in [Article V, subparagraph 1(A), of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=V).

##### IV

1. The States Parties shall, during the period before 31 May 1999, examine the Treaty provisions on designated permanent storage sites so as to allow all battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, and artillery in designated permanent storage sites, including those subject to regional numerical limitations, to be located with active units.

2. The Russian Federation shall have the right to utilize to the maximum extent possible the provisions of the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009) on temporary deployment of battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, and artillery within its territory and outside its territory. Such temporary deployments on the territory of other States Parties shall be achieved by means of free negotiations and with full respect for the sovereignty of the States Parties involved.

3. The Russian Federation shall have the right to utilize, to the maximum extent possible, reallocation, in accordance with existing agreements, of the current quotas for battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, and artillery established by the Agreement on the Principles and Procedures for the Implementation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, done at Tashkent on 15 May 1992. Such reallocations shall be achieved by means of free negotiations and with full respect for the sovereignty of the States Parties involved.

4. The Russian Federation shall count against the numerical limitations established in the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009) and paragraph 1 of Section II of this Document any armoured combat vehicles listed as “to be removed" in its information exchange of 1 January 1996 that are not so removed by 31 May 1999.

##### V

1. In addition to the annual information exchange provided pursuant to Section VII, subparagraph 1(C), of the Protocol on Notification and Exchange of Information, the Russian Federation shall provide information equal to that reported in the annual information exchange on the area described in [Article V, subparagraph 1(A), of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=V), as understood by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics at the time the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009) was signed, upon provisional application of this Document and every six months after the annual information exchange. In the case of Kush- chevskaya, the Russian Federation shall provide such additional information every three months after the annual information exchange.

2. Upon provisional application of this Document, Ukraine shall provide “F21" notifications for its holdings within the Odessa oblast on the basis of changes of five, rather than ten, per cent or more in assigned holdings.

3. Subject to paragraphs 5 and 6 of this Section, the Russian Federation shall, upon provisional application of this Document, accept each year, in addition to its passive declared site inspection quota established pursuant to Section II, subparagraph 10(D), of the Protocol on Inspection, up to a total of 10 supplementary declared site inspections, conducted in accordance with the Protocol on Inspection, at objects of verification:

- A). located within the Pskov oblast; the Volgograd oblast; the Astrakhan oblast; that part of the Rostov oblast east of the line extending from Kushchevskaya to Volgodonsk to the Volgograd oblast border, including Volgodonsk; and Kushchevskaya and a narrow corridor in Krasnodar kray leading to Kushchevskaya;

- B). containing conventional armaments and equipment limited by the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009) designated by the Russian Federation in its annual information exchange of 1 January 1996 as “to be removed", until such time that a declared site inspection confirms that such equipment has been removed.

4. Subject to paragraphs 5 and 6 of this Section, Ukraine shall, upon provisional application of this Document, accept each year, in addition to its passive declared site inspection quota established pursuant to Section II, subparagraph 10(D), of the Protocol on Inspection, up to a total of one supplementary declared site inspection, conducted in accordance with the Protocol on Inspection, at objects of verification located within the Odessa oblast.

5. The number of supplementary declared site inspections conducted at objects of verification pursuant to paragraph 3 or 4 of this Section shall not exceed the number of declared site passive quota inspections, established in accordance with Section II, subparagraph 10(D), of the Protocol on Inspection, conducted at those objects of verification in the course of the same year.

6. All supplementary declared site inspections conducted pursuant to paragraph 3 or 4 of this Section:

- A). shall be carried out at the cost of the inspecting State Party, consistent with prevailing commercial rates; and

- B). at the discretion of the inspecting State Party, shall be conducted either as a sequential inspection or as a separate inspection.

##### VI

1. This Document shall enter into force upon receipt by the Depositary of notification of confirmation of approval by all States Parties. Section II, paragraphs 2 and 3, Section IV and Section V of this Document are hereby provisionally applied as of 31 May 1996 through 15 December 1996. If this Document does not enter into force by 15 December 1996, then it shall be reviewed by the States Parties.

2. This Document, in all six official languages of the Treaty, shall be deposited with the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, as the designated Depositary for the Treaty, which shall circulate copies of this Document to all States Parties.

##### 1

The States Parties stress the need to ensure that relevant Government authorities charged with Treaty implementation fulfil all the obligations of the Decision of the Joint Consultative Group on the cost of inspections dated 23 May 1995.

##### 2

The States Parties agree that, pursuant to the Protocol on Inspection, Section VII, paragraph 1,

- a. in case an inspected State Party or the State Party exercising the rights and obligations of the inspected State Party delays an inspection on grounds of **force majeure,**it shall, in written form, explain the reasons for this delay in detail; This should take place as follows:

- –. if **force majeure**is declared prior to the arrival of the inspection team, through the answer to the relevant notifications;

- –. if **force majeure**is declared after the arrival of the inspection team at the point of entry, the explanation should be presented as soon as possible, through diplomatic channels or other official channels.

- b. in case of such a delay due to **force majeure,**the provisions of Section XI, paragraph 2, of the Protocol on Inspection shall apply.

##### 3

Each State Party shall provide to all other States Parties annually, but not later than 15 December, the complete updated list of inspectors and transport crew members. In case of additions to the list of inspectors and transport crew members, the State Party shall provide the complete updated list, highlighting the additions.

##### 4

Each State Party with territory in the area of application shall provide to all other States Parties during the annual exchange of information the standing diplomatic clearance numbers for their aviation transportation means for the subsequent calendar year.

##### 5

Each State Party shall provide to all other States Parties during the annual exchange of information the list of its officially recognized holidays for the subsequent calendar year.

##### 6

The State Party whose inspection team intends to transit the territory of another State Party prior to conducting the inspection should inform the transited State(s) Party (Parties) about the estimated time of transit, cross-border points and transportation means to be used by the inspection team, as well as a list of inspectors and drivers with passport numbers.

##### 7

The States Parties agree that a specified area may contain declared sites of their own and stationed forces; but all declared sites within a specified area are excluded from an inspection of the specified area (inspections in accordance with Section VIII of the Protocol on Inspection) as they can be inspected only in accordance with Section VII of the Protocol on Inspection.

##### 8

The States Parties agree to send the notification of the intent to inspect simultaneously to the host and the stationing States Parties, if the inspecting State intends to conduct a sequential inspection which involves stationed forces.

##### 9

Where appropriate and with the agreement of the State Party on whose territory an inspection is to be carried out in respect of conventional armaments and equipment limited by the [Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009) of a stationing State Party, the stationing State Party shall assist the host nation in the provision of security protection to both the inspection team and the escort team for the duration of the inspection.

##### 10

Notifications of changes of 10 per cent of holdings:

- –. The States Parties agree that, pursuant to Section VIII, subparagraph 1(B), of the Protocol on Notification and Exchange of Information, the most recent update of information on holdings will always constitute the basis for any subsequent change to be notified under this paragraph.

- –. The notification of any change of 10 per cent or more shall be given no later than five days after such change occurs. The time period of five days is understood as being five working days.

##### 11

The States Parties agree to notify:

- –. Any changes in the designation of formations or units pursuant to Sections I, III and V of the Protocol on Notification and Exchange of Information, at least 42 days in advance;

- –. Any closures of objects of verification within the last month pursuant to Section V of the Protocol on Notification and Exchange of Information, on the fifteenth of each month;

- –. Any creation of, or relocation of, an object of verification at least 42 days in advance.

##### 12

The States Parties agree that, in addition to the requirements for the submission of information and notifications as prescribed in [Article XVII of the Treaty](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0002009&artikel=XVII) and in paragraph 1 of the Annex on the Format for the Exchange of Information to the Protocol on Notification and Exchange of Information, they will endeavour to supplement the annual exchange of information pursuant to the aforementioned Protocol in written form by an electronic data version on diskette in the agreed format, the written form remaining the official version.

##### 13

Each State Party should notify to all other States Parties its passive declared site inspection quota coincident with each annual exchange of information provided pursuant to the Protocol on Notification and Exchange of Information, Section VII, subparagraph 1(C).
