---
title: "Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden, ten behoeve van Curaçao, en de Wereld Meteorologische Organisatie, betreffende de maatregelen voor de zestiende zitting van de WMO Regional Association IV (Noord-Amerika, Centraal Amerika en de Caraïben)"
identifier: "BWBV0006126"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2014-04-03"
last_updated: "2014-04-03"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0006126"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10005041523"
version_id: "10005372142"
internal_id: "C10008279781"
label_id: "10005024654"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2014-04-03"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0006126/2014-04-03/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2013-69"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2013-04-08"
intitule_in_force: "2013-04-08"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2013-69"
original_published_date: "2013-04-08"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2013-69"
entry_into_force_date: "2014-04-03"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0006126&z=2014-04-03&g=2014-04-03"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0006126&g=2014-04-03"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2014-04-03"
---
# Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden, ten behoeve van Curaçao, en de Wereld Meteorologische Organisatie, betreffende de maatregelen voor de zestiende zitting van de WMO Regional Association IV (Noord-Amerika, Centraal Amerika en de Caraïben)

The Kingdom of the Netherlands, in respect of Curaçao,

and

The World Meteorological Organization, (hereinafter referred to as “WMO”),

Upon invitation of the Government of Curaçao (hereinafter referred to as “the Government”) to hold the sixteenth session of WMO Regional Association IV (North America, Central America and the Caribbean) in Willemstad (hereinafter referred to as “the session”),

Hereby agree as follows:

##### Article I. Date and place of the session

Vervallen

##### Article II. Legal Status

Vervallen

##### Article III. Participation at the session

Vervallen

##### Article IV. Premises, equipment, utilities and supplies

Vervallen

##### Article V. Accommodation

Vervallen

##### Article VI. Medical facilities

Vervallen

##### Article VII. Transport

Vervallen

##### Article VIII. Local personnel

Vervallen

##### Article IX. Customs and financial facilities

Vervallen

##### Article X. Inviolability and protection of the Session

Vervallen

##### Article XI. Financial arrangements

Vervallen

##### Article XII. Liability

Vervallen

##### Article XIII. Settlement of disputes

Vervallen

##### Article XIV. Final provisions

Vervallen

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have concluded this Agreement.

DONE at this 3rd day of April 2013 at Geneva in duplicate, in the English language.

**For the Kingdom of the Netherlands, in respect of Curaçao,**

EARL BALBORDA

Minister of Traffic, Transport and Urban Planning

**For the World Meteorological Organization,**

M. JARRAUD

Secretary-General
