---
title: "Briefwisseling houdende een verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden, ten behoeve van Curaçao, en de Organisatie der Verenigde Naties voor Onderwijs, Wetenschap en Cultuur (UNESCO) betreffende de zevende zitting van de intergouvernementele coördinatiegroep van de Intergouvernementele Oceanografische Commissie (IOC) voor het waarschuwingssysteem voor tsunami's en andere kustbedreigingen voor de Caribische en aangrenzende regio's (ICG/CARIBE EWS-VII), Willemstad, Curaçao, van 2 tot 4 april 2012"
identifier: "BWBV0005690"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2013-04-02"
last_updated: "2012-04-02"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0005690"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10004813883"
version_id: "10005121752"
internal_id: "C10007789751"
label_id: "10004797794"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2013-04-02"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0005690/2013-04-02/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2012-63 HERDRUK"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2012-04-10"
intitule_in_force: "2012-04-10"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2012-63 HERDRUK"
original_published_date: "2012-04-10"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2012-63 HERDRUK"
entry_into_force_date: "2013-04-02"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0005690&z=2013-04-02&g=2013-04-02"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0005690&g=2013-04-02"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2013-04-02"
---
# Briefwisseling houdende een verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden, ten behoeve van Curaçao, en de Organisatie der Verenigde Naties voor Onderwijs, Wetenschap en Cultuur (UNESCO) betreffende de zevende zitting van de intergouvernementele coördinatiegroep van de Intergouvernementele Oceanografische Commissie (IOC) voor het waarschuwingssysteem voor tsunami's en andere kustbedreigingen voor de Caribische en aangrenzende regio's (ICG/CARIBE EWS-VII), Willemstad, Curaçao, van 2 tot 4 april 2012

UNESCO

Ref.: DG/2.1/12/2479

Agreement between The Kingdom of the Netherlands, on behalf of Curaçao and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) concerning the seventh session of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) Intergovernmental Coordination Group for the Tsunami and other Coastal Hazards Warning System for the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions (ICG/CARIBE EWS-VII), Willemstad, Curaçao, 2 to 4 april 2012

Dear Ambassador,

I wish to refer to the kind offer of the Government of Curaçao, made through its representative at the session of the Intergovernmental Coordination Group for the Tsunami and Other Coastal Hazards Warning System for the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions (ICG/CARIBE EWS-VI), which took place in Santo Domingo (Dominican Republic), to host the seventh session of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission’s (IOC) ICG/CARIBE EWS-VII). Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate my sincere thanks to the Government of Curaçao for this generous offer, which I am pleased to accept on behalf of UNESCO.

Whereas the IOC was identified as one of the means through which UNESCO will mobilize science knowledge and policy for sustainable development in the Medium Term Strategy for 2008–2013 (34 C/4) approved by the 34th General Conference of UNESCO,

Whereas the ICG/CARIBE EWS is a Subsidiary Body of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), as endorsed by IOC Resolution XXIII.13 (2005),

With the present letter, I wish to obtain your Government’s acceptance of the following:

##### Article I. Purpose

The main purpose of the present Agreement is to establish the terms of cooperation between UNESCO and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, on behalf of Curaçao, (hereinafter jointly referred to as: “the Parties”) concerning the arrangements to be made for the above-mentioned session.

##### Article II. Date and Place of the Session

The Session shall be held in Willemstad (Curaçao) under the auspices of the Meteorological Department of Curaçao, from 2 to 4 April 2012.

##### Article III. Principles

The Parties, entering into this Agreement following principles that are founded in respect, mutual goodwill, accord each other all reasonable cooperation and assistance as may be expected between institutions committed to the highest standards of scientific research.

##### Article IV. Participation

1. The chief participants shall be representatives of IOC Member States.

2. In conformity with Article 6, paragraph C.10, of the Statutes of the IOC, concerning participation in the meetings of the Assembly of the Executive Council and Subsidiary Bodies, the following persons shall be invited to participate, without the right to vote:

- –. Representatives of Member States of organizations of the United Nations system, which are not members of IOC;

- –. Representatives of organizations of the United Nations system;

- –. Representatives of such other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as may be invited, subject to conditions specified in the Rules of Procedure.

3. UNESCO will duly provide to the designated authorities the names of the participants who have accepted the invitation.

4. The IOC Executive Secretary shall designate the officials of UNESCO assigned to attend the session for the purpose of servicing it. Those officials are hereinafter referred to as “the Secretariat”.

##### Article V. Organization of the Session

1. The Government of Curaçao shall bear the expenses related to the provision of materials and facilities for the holding of this session on the basis of the attached Statement of Requirements.

2. The premises shall remain at the disposal of UNESCO 24 hours a day from one day prior to the session until a maximum of one day after its close.

3. The Government of Curaçao shall bear the cost of all necessary utility services, including local telephone communications of the Secretariat, as well as its communications by telex or telephone when such communications are authorized by or on behalf of the representative of the IOC Executive Secretary at the session or the conference officer.

4. The Parties mutually agree to make necessary adjustments to ensure the proper organization of the session, as detailed in the attached Statements of Requirements

##### Article VI. Accommodation

The Government of Curaçao shall ensure that adequate accommodation in hotels or residences is available at reasonable commercial rates for persons participating in or attending the session, as well as for the staff of UNESCO.

##### Article VII. Medical Assistance

1. In the event of emergencies, necessary first aid shall be provided by the Government of Curaçao within the conference area.

2. For serious emergencies, the Government of Curaçao shall assist with immediate transportation and admission to a hospital.

3. The costs of items set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, as well as medical insurance, will be at one’s own expense.

##### Article VIII. Transport

1. The Government of Curaçao shall ensure the availability of transport between the international airport, the principal hotels and the conference area.

2. The Government of Curaçao shall provide an adequate number of cars with drivers for official use by the principal officers and joint Secretariat, as well as such other local transportation as is required by the Secretariat in connection with the ICG/CARIBE EWS-VII session, if needed.

##### Article IX. Security Protection

The Government of Curaçao shall furnish such security guarantee as may be required to ensure the effective functioning of the session in an atmosphere of security and tranquillity free from interference of any kind. While such services shall be provided by a senior officer designated by the Government of Curaçao, this officer shall work in close cooperation with the representative of the IOC Executive Secretary at the session or the conference officer.

##### Article X. Local Personnel

1. The Government of Curaçao shall appoint a liaison officer who shall be responsible, in consultation with UNESCO, for making and carrying out the administrative and personnel arrangements for the session, as required under this Agreement.

2. The Government of Curaçao shall recruit and provide an adequate number of local staff such as translators, clerks, personnel for the reproduction and distribution of documents, sound operators, ushers, messengers, cleaners and other workmen required for the proper functioning of the session, as stated in the attached Statement of Requirements.

##### Article XI. Damage and Accidents

1. The Government of Curaçao shall be responsible for dealing with any action, claim or other demand against UNESCO or its officials and arising out of:

- a). Injury to persons, accidents, damage to or loss of property in the premises referred to in [Article V](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005690&artikel=V&z=2012-04-02&g=2012-04-02) that are provided by, or are under the control of, the Government of Curaçao;

- b). Injury to persons or damage to or loss of property caused by, or incurred in using, the transport services referred to in [Article VIII](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005690&artikel=VIII&z=2012-04-02&g=2012-04-02) that are provided by, or are under the control of, the Government of Curaçao;

- c). The employment for the session of the personnel provided by the Government of Curaçao under [Article X](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005690&artikel=X&z=2012-04-02&g=2012-04-02).

2. The Government of Curaçao shall indemnify and hold harmless UNESCO in respect of any such action, claim or other demand and shall bear the risk of damage to the premises, facilities and furniture.

3. The competent authorities of the Government of Curaçao shall adopt at its own expense appropriate measures to ensure the protection, particularly against fire and other risks, of the above-mentioned premises, facilities, furniture and persons.

4. The necessary insurance fee of participants should be paid by themselves.

##### Article XII. Privileges and Immunities

The Government of Curaçao shall apply, in all matters relating to this meeting, the provisions of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies of the United Nations. In particular, the Government shall ensure that no restriction is placed upon the entry into, sojourn in and departure from Curaçao of all persons, of whatever nationality, entitled to attend the meeting by virtue of a decision of the appropriate authorities of UNESCO and in accordance with the Organization's relevant rules and regulations, provided that the general conditions governing entry are fulfilled.

##### Article XIII. Visas

The Government of Curaçao shall ease the participation of participants in the above-mentioned session by facilitating their obtaining of visas in due time.

##### Article XIV. Settlement of Disputes

1. The Parties will negotiate and cooperate with each other in good faith to resolve any disputes or conflicts that arise in connection with this Agreement.

2. Any dispute not settled by negotiation or other agreed mode of settlement shall be referred for final decision, at the request of either Party, to a tribunal of three arbitrators, one to be named by UNESCO, one to be named by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the third, who shall be the chairman, to be chosen by the first two; if either Party fails to appoint an arbitrator within 60 days of the appointment by the other Party, or if these two arbitrators should fail to consent on the third arbitrator within 60 days of their appointment, the President of the International Court of Justice may make any necessary appointments at the request of either Party.

##### Article XV. Final Provision

The Annex to this Agreement may be modified by written arrangement between UNESCO and the Government of Curaçao.

I further propose that upon receipt of your Government’s confirmation in writing of the above, that this exchange of letters constitute an Agreement between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the United Nations Educational, Scientificand Cultural Organization regarding the hosting of the session, which shall enter into force on the date of your reply and shall remain in force for the duration of the session and for such additional period as is necessary for its preparation and winding up, the total duration of this Agreement, however, is not to exceed one year.

Irina Bokova

Director General

UNESCO

**H. E. Mr Robert Zeldenrust**

**Ambassador**

**Permanent Delegate of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to UNESCO**

**7, rue Eblé**
