---
title: "Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en de Verenigde Naties betreffende de zetel van het Internationaal Tribunaal voor de vervolging van personen verantwoordelijk voor ernstige schendingen van het internationaal humanitair recht op het grondgebied van het voormalig Joegoslavië sedert 1991"
identifier: "BWBV0001138"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "2016-09-01"
last_updated: "2016-09-01"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0001138"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10001730353"
version_id: "10005805882"
internal_id: "C10009148161"
label_id: "10001730724"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "2016-09-01"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0001138/2016-09-01/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.2016-139"
intitule_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
intitule_published: "2016-09-07"
intitule_in_force: "2016-09-07"
intitule_status: "vervallen"
original_publication: "Trb.2016-139"
original_published_date: "2016-09-07"
original_effect: "intrekking-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-2016-139"
entry_into_force_date: "2016-09-01"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0001138&z=2016-09-01&g=2016-09-01"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0001138&g=2016-09-01"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "2016-09-01"
---
# Verdrag tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en de Verenigde Naties betreffende de zetel van het Internationaal Tribunaal voor de vervolging van personen verantwoordelijk voor ernstige schendingen van het internationaal humanitair recht op het grondgebied van het voormalig Joegoslavië sedert 1991

The Kingdom of the Netherlands and the United Nations,

Whereas the Security Council acting under [Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0004143&hoofdstuk=VII) decided, by paragraph 1 of its resolution 808 (1993) of 22 February 1993, **inter alia**“that an international tribunal shall be established for the prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991”;

Whereas the International Tribunal is established as a subsidiary organ within the terms of [Article 29 of the Charter of the United Nations](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0004143&artikel=29);

Whereas the Security Council, in paragraph 6 of its resolution 827(1993) of 25 May 1993 further **inter alia**decided that “the determination of the seat of the International Tribunal is subject to the conclusion of appropriate arrangements between the United Nations and the Netherlands acceptable to the Council”;

Whereas the Statute of the International Tribunal in its Article 31, provides that “the International Tribunal shall have its seat at The Hague”:

Whereas the United Nations and the Kingdom of the Netherlands wish to conclude an Agreement regulating matters arising from the establishment and necessary for the proper functioning of the International Tribunal in the Kingdom of the Netherlands;

Have agreed as follows:

##### Article I. Definitions

Vervallen

##### Article II. Purpose and scope of the Agreement

Vervallen

##### Article III. Juridical personality of the Tribunal

Vervallen

##### Article IV. Application of the [General](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0005561) and [Vienna Conventions](https://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBV0004345)

Vervallen

##### Article V. Inviolability of the premises of the Tribunal

Vervallen

##### Article VI. Law and authority on the premises of the Tribunal

Vervallen

##### Article VII. Protection of the premises of the Tribunal and their vicinity

Vervallen

##### Article VIII. Funds, assets and other property

Vervallen

##### Article IX. Inviolability of archives and all documents of the Tribunal

Vervallen

##### Article X. Exemption from taxes and duties

Vervallen

##### Article XI. Communications facilities

Vervallen

##### Article XII. Public services for the premises of the Tribunal

Vervallen

##### Article XIII. Flag, emblem and markings

Vervallen

##### Article XIV. Privileges and immunities of the Judges, the Prosecutor and the Registrar

Vervallen

##### Article XV. Privileges and immunities of officials of the Tribunal

Vervallen

##### Article XV bis. Employment of Family Members of Officials

Vervallen

##### Article XVI. Personnel recruited locally and assigned to hourly rates

Vervallen

##### Article XVII. Persons performing missions for the Tribunal

Vervallen

##### Article XVIII. Witnesses and experts appearing before the Tribunal

Vervallen

##### Article XIX. Counsel

Vervallen

##### Article XX. The suspect or accused

Vervallen

##### Article XXI. Co-operation with the competent authorities

Vervallen

##### Article XXII. Notification

Vervallen

##### Article XXIII. Entry into, exit from and movement within the host country

Vervallen

##### Article XXIV. United Nations Laissez-passer and certificate

Vervallen

##### Article XXV. Identification cards

Vervallen

##### Article XXVI. Security, safety and protection of persons referred to in this Agreement

Vervallen

##### Article XXVII. Social security and Pension Fund

Vervallen

##### Article XXVIII. Settlement of disputes

Vervallen

##### Article XXIX. Final provisions

Vervallen

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorized thereto have signed this Agreement.

DONE at New York on 29 July 1994 in duplicate, in the English Ianguage.

**For the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands**

(sd.) J. D'ANSEMBOURG

**For the United Nations**

(sd.) HANS CORELL
