---
title: "Handelsovereenkomst tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en het Koninkrijk Egypte"
identifier: "BWBV0005203"
country: "nl"
rank: "verdrag"
publication_date: "1953-03-21"
last_updated: "1953-03-21"
status: "in_force"
source: "https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBV0005203"
soort: "verdrag"
stam_id: "10004514593"
version_id: "10004730672"
internal_id: "C10007000931"
label_id: "10004499094"
dtd_version: "2.0"
original_entry_into_force: "1953-03-21"
toestand_uri: "http://wetten.overheid.nl/id/BWBV0005203/1953-03-21/0"
intitule_bron: "Trb.1953-43"
intitule_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
intitule_published: "1953-05-28"
intitule_in_force: "1953-05-28"
intitule_status: "goed"
original_publication: "Trb.1953-43"
original_published_date: "1953-05-28"
original_effect: "nieuwe-regeling"
original_url_id: "trb-1953-43"
entry_into_force_date: "1953-03-21"
jci_1_3: "jci1.3:c:BWBV0005203&z=1953-03-21&g=1953-03-21"
jci_1_0: "1.0:c:BWBV0005203&g=1953-03-21"
citeertitel_status: "redactioneel"
entry_into_force: "1953-03-21"
---
# Handelsovereenkomst tussen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden en het Koninkrijk Egypte

Moved by the desire to promote and develop economic relations between their respective countries to the greatest possible extent, bearing in mind the exchange of notes of March 17th, 1930, concerning “most favoured nation” treatment, the Government of the Kingdom of Egypt and the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands have agreed upon the following provisions.

##### Article 1

The Netherlands Government will freely issue import licences for all goods of Egyptian origin that appear on the Netherlands list of liberalised imports as presented to the Organisation of European Economic Cooperation. For the Egyptian goods not included in this list, import licences will be granted within the quotas enumerated in the Annex. The inclusion of quotas for new articles or increases of the present quotas will be favourably considered.

##### Article 2

The Egyptian Government will freely issue import licences for all goods of Netherlands origin.

##### Article 3

Payments and other charges in connection with goods delivered and services rendered will be settled in accordance with the provisions of the Payments Agreement signed to-day. Payments in third currencies will be possible if accepted by both parties.

##### Article 4

Obligations entered into under the provisions of the present Agreement, but not yet fulfilled on the date of termination, will be settled in conformity with these provisions.

##### Article 5

The Contracting Parties undertake to arrange for a Mixed Commission representing the two Governments in order to review the progress of trade and payments, as well as all other questions relevant to the present arrangements, to examine difficulties that may have arisen, to decide upon ways and means for overcoming these difficulties or to revise the provisions of the present Agreements if this is deemed necessary by either or both Contracting Parties. The Mixed Commission will meet at the request of either Party with the least possible delay.

##### Article 6

The present Agreement will come into force on the day of its signature. Both parties can terminate it with a term of notice of three months.

DONE in Cairo on the 21st March, 1953.

For the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,

(Sd) CNOOP KOOPMANS

For the Government of the Kingdom of Egypt,

(Sd) M. FAWZY
